Software Requirements
Specification Document

Software Requirements Specification?
 A software requirements specification (SRS) is a
document that captures complete description about how
the system is expected to perform. It is usually signed
off at the end of requirements engineering phase.
IEEE defines software requirements specification as, 'a
document that clearly and precisely describes each of the
essential requirements (functions, performance, design
constraints and quality attributes) of the software and
the external interfaces.
The SRS is developed based the agreement between
customer and contractors.

Software Requirements Specification
Table of Contents
I.

Introduction

II. General Description
III. External Interface Requirements
IV. System Features
V. Other Nonfunctional Requirements
VI. Other Requirements & Appendices

Software Requirements Specification
I. Introduction
A Purpose
B Document Conventions
C Scope
D Definition, Acronyms, or Abbreviations
E References
F Overview

Software Requirements Specification
I.

Introduction

Borrowing books, returning books or viewing the available books at the Library of the local
University is currently done manually where in the student has to go to the Library and
check the available books at the Library. Students check the list of books available and
borrow the books if the book is a borrow book otherwise it is of waste for the student to
come to the library to come to check for the books if the student doesn’t get the book. Then
the librarian checks the student id and allows the member to check out the book and the
librarian then updates the member database and also the books database. This takes at least
one to two hours if the member is available at the near by place otherwise it may take more
time.
We have decided to investigate the use of an Online Library Management System. This
system would be used by members who may be students or professors of that University to
check the availability of the books and borrow the books, and by the librarian to update the
databases. The purpose of this document is to analyze and elaborate on the high-level needs
and features of the Online Library System. It focuses on the capabilities and facilities
provided by a Library. The details of what all are the needs of the Online Library System
and if it fulfils these needs are detailed in the use-case and supplementary specifications.

Systems Requirements Specification
I.

Introduction
A Purpose

<Identify the product whose software requirements are specified in
this document, including the revision or release number. Describe
the scope of the product that is covered by this SRS, particularly if
this SRS describes only part of the system or a single subsystem.>

Software Requirements Specification
I.

Introduction
A Purpose

The purpose of Software Requirements Specification (SRS)
document is to describe the external behavior of the Online Library
System. Requirements Specification defines and describes the
operations, interfaces, performance, and quality assurance
requirements of the Online Library System. The document also
describes the nonfunctional requirements such as the user interfaces. It
also describes the design constraints that are to be considered when the
system is to be designed, and other factors necessary to provide a
complete and comprehensive description of the requirements for the
software.

Software Requirements Specification
I.

Introduction
B. Document Conventions

Describe any standards or typographical conventions that
were followed when writing this SRS, such as fonts or
highlighting that have special significance.
For example, state whether priorities for higher-level
requirements are assumed to be inherited by detailed
requirements, or whether every requirement statement is to
have its own priority

Software Requirements Specification
I.

Introduction

B. Document Conventions
Entire document should be justified.
 Convention for Main title
Font face: Times New Roman
Font style: Bold
Font Size: 14
Convention for Sub title
Font face: Times New Roman
Font style: Bold
Font Size: 12
 Convention for body
Font face: Times New Roman
Font Size: 12

Software Requirements Specification
I.

Introduction
C. Scope

<Provide a short description of the software being
specified and its purpose, including relevant benefits,
objectives, and goals. Relate the software to corporate
goals or business strategies. If a separate vision and scope
document is available, refer to it rather than duplicating its
contents here.>

Software Requirements Specification
I.

Introduction
C. Scope

The Software Requirements Specification captures all the requirements in a single
document. The Online Library System that is to be developed provides the
members of the Library and employees of the library with books information,
online blocking of books and many other facilities. The Online Library System is
supposed to have the following features.
•The product provides the members with online blocking of books capabilities and
the Online Library System is up and running all day.
•The system provides logon facility to the users.
•The system provides the members with the option to check their account and/or
change their options like password of the account whenever needed all through the
day during the library hours.
•The system allows the members to block the books 24 hours a day and all the
through the semester.

Software Requirements Specification
I.

Introduction

C. Scope
•The system lets the library staff to check which all members have
blocked the books and whether they can borrow any more books or
not.
•The system allows the Librarian to create the books catalog,
add/delete books and maintain the books catalog.
•The system updates the billing system as and when the member
borrows or returns a book.
•The book catalog is automated and the decision of offering the book
based on the category of the book is automatically decided.
•We also have an order department, which manages to add or remove
a book from the Library.

Software Requirements Specification
I.

Introduction

D. Definitions, Acronyms..
As you begin to define a system, you will encounter words
which need definition and general usage acronyms. These
should be documented for new personnel and for clarity of
all concerned parties.

Software Requirements Specification
I.Introduction
D Definitions, Acronyms..

SPPU-Savitribai Phule Pune University
Acc.No.-Accession number
ISBN-International Standard Book Number

Software Requirements Specification
I. Introduction
E. References
<List any other documents or Web addresses to which this SRS
refers. These may include user interface style guides, contracts,
standards, system requirements specifications, use case documents,
or a vision and scope document. Provide enough information so that
the reader could access a copy of each reference, including title,
author, version number, date, and source or location.>

Software Requirements Specification
I. Introduction E References
 Books
1. Software Requirements and Specifications: A Lexicon of Practice,
Principles and
2.Prejudices (ACM Press) by Michael Jackson
3. Software Requirements (Microsoft) Second EditionBy Karl E. Wiegers
4. Software Engineering: A Practitioner’s Approach Fifth Edition By Roger S.
Pressman
Websites
1. http://www.slideshare.net/
2. http://ebookily.net/doc/srs-library-management-system

Software Requirements Specification
I. Introduction
F. Overview
This section defines the organization of the entire
document. It will lay the framework for reading
the document.

Software Requirements Specification
I. Introduction F Overview
The SRS will provide a detailed description of the Online Library System. This
document will provide the outline of the requirements, overview of the
characteristics and constraints of the system.
1.5.1 Section 2: This section of the SRS will provide the general factors that affect
the product and its requirements. It provides the background for those requirements.
The items such as product perspective, product function, user characteristics,
constraints, assumptions and dependencies and requirements subsets are described
in this section.
1.5.2 Section 3: This section of SRS contains all the software requirements
mentioned in section 2 in detail sufficient enough to enable designers to design the
system to satisfy the requirements and testers to test if the system satisfies those
requirements.

Software Requirements Specification
II. General Description
A Product Perspective
B Product Functions
C User Characteristics
D General Constraints
E Assumptions
F Operating Environment

Software Requirements Specification
II General Description
A Product Perspective
•<Describe the context and origin of the product being specified in
this SRS.
•For example, state whether this product is a follow-on member of a
product family, a replacement for certain existing systems, or a new,
self-contained product.
•A simple diagram that shows the major components of the overall
system, subsystem interconnections, and external interfaces can be
helpful.>

Software Requirements Specification
II General Description
A Product Perspective
The Online Library System is a package to be used by Libraries
to improve the efficiency of Librarians, Library employees and
Users. The Online Library System to be developed benefits
greatly the members and the Librarian of SPPU. The system
provides books catalog and information to members and helps
them decide on the books to borrow from the library. The
Librarian can keep the books catalog updated all the time so that
the members (students and the professors) get the updated
information all the time.

Software Requirements Specification
II General Description A Product Perspective

Software Requirements Specification
II. General Description B Product Functions
<Summarize the major functions the product must perform or must
let the user perform. Details will be provided in Section 3, so only a
high level summary (such as a bullet list) is needed here. Organize
the functions to make them understandable to any reader of the
SRS. A picture of the major groups of related requirements and
how they relate, such as a top level data flow diagram or object
class diagram, is often effective.>

Software Requirements Specification
II. General Description – B Product Functions
Provisions for the members to borrow the books they want.
The members are provided with the books available roster and allowed to choose
the books, which they want to use in the coming up days.
The librarian can get the information about the members who have borrowed or
returned the books.
The librarian is provided with interfaces to add/delete the books available in the
book catalog.
The members when complete the book borrowing or returning process, the due
to be paid by the member must be calculated and the information about the
member and the due amount is sent to the university billing system.
The system uses the University information security requirements to provide the
login facility to the users.

Software Requirements Specification
II. General Description – C User Characteristics
Identify the various user classes that you anticipate will
use this product.
User classes may be differentiated based on frequency of
use, subset of product functions used, technical expertise,
security or privilege levels, educational level, or
experience.
Describe the characteristics of each user class.

Software Requirements Specification
II. General Description – C User Characteristics
The users of the system are members, librarian of the university
and the administrators who maintain the system.
The members and the librarian are assumed to have basic
knowledge of the computers and Internet browsing.
The administrators of the system to have more knowledge of the
internals of the system and is able to rectify the small problems that
may arise due to disk crashes, power failures and other catastrophes
to maintain the system.

Software Requirements Specification
II. General Description – D General Constraints

In this section, the constraints of the system
are listed. They include hardware, network,
system software, and software constraints.
It also includes user constraints, processing
constraints, timing constraints, and control
limits.

Software Requirements Specification
II. General Description – D General Constraints
 The information of all the users must be stored in a database that is accessible
by the Online Library System.
 The university information security system must be compatible with the
Internet applications.
 The Online Library System is connected to the university computer and is
running all 24 hours a day.
 The users access the Online Library System from any computer that has
Internet browsing capabilities and an Internet connection.
 The billing system is connected to the Online Library System and the database
used by the billing system must be compatible with the interface of the Online
Library System.
 The users must have their correct usernames and passwords to enter into the
Online Library System.

Software Requirements Specification
II General Description – E Assumptions and Dependencies
List any assumed factors (as opposed to known facts) that could
affect the requirements stated in the SRS. These could include
third-party or commercial components that you plan to use, issues
around the development or operating environment, or constraints.
The project could be affected if these assumptions are incorrect,
are not shared, or change.
Also identify any dependencies the project has on external factors,
such as software components that you intend to reuse from another
project, unless they are already documented elsewhere (for
example, in the vision and scope document or the project plan).

Software Requirements Specification
II General Description – E Assumptions and Dependencies
 The users have sufficient knowledge of computers.
 The University computer should have Internet connection and
Internet server capabilities.
 The users know the English language, as the user interface will
be provided in English
 The product can access the university student database

Software Requirements Specification
II General Description – F Operating Environment
Describe the environment in which the software will operate,
including the hardware platform, operating system and versions,
and any other software components or applications with which it
must peacefully coexist
The product will be operating in windows environment. The
Library Management System is a website and shall operate in all
famous browsers, for a model we are taking Microsoft Internet
Explorer,Google Chrome,and Mozilla Firefox.Also it will be
compatible with the IE 6.0.
The hardware configuration include Hard Disk: 40 GB,
Monitor: 15” Color monitor, Keyboard: 122 keys. The basic
input devices required are keyboard, mouse and output devices
are monitor, printer etc.

Section II of SRS
II.A Product Perspective

Paragraph form

II.B Product Functions

Paragraph form

II.C User Characteristics

Paragraph form

II.D General Constraints

Paragraph form

II.E Assumptions and
Dependencies

Paragraph form

3.Specific Requirements 3.1Functional Requirements
Functional requirements are those business functions which are included in this
software under development. It describes the features of the product and the needed
behavior. Each requirement is something that the system SHALL do. Thus, it has a
common name of a shall list.
These include
a) Validity checks on the inputs
b) Exact sequence of operations
c) Responses to abnormal situations, including
1) Overflow
2) Communication facilities
3) Error handling and recovery
d) Effect of parameters
e) Relationship of outputs to inputs, including
1) Input/output sequences
2) Formulas for input to output conversion

Functional Requirements
• Provide Search facility.
 The system shall enable user to enter the search text on the screen.
 The system shall enable user to select multiple options on the screen
to search.
 The system shall display all the matching products based on the
search
 The system shall display only 10 matching result on the current
screen.
 The system shall enable user to navigate between the search results.
 The system shall notify the user when no matching product is found
on the search.

3.2 External Interface Requirements
3.2.1 User Interface
 The user interface for the software shall be compatible to any browser such as Internet
Explorer, Mozilla or Netscape Navigator by which user can access to the system.
 The user interface shall be implemented using any tool or software package like Java
Applet, MS Front Page, EJB etc.
3.2.2 Hardware Interfaces
Since the application must run over the internet, all the hardware shall require to connect
internet will be hardware interface for the system. As for e.g. Modem, WAN – LAN,
Ethernet Cross-Cable.
3.2.3 Software Interfaces
Libra will directly interface with the modified Sun Grid Engine cluster management
system, version 5.3. SGE in turn will be interfacing with the operating system and any
other software components it requires
3.2.4 Communication Interfaces
The e-store system shall use the HTTP protocol for communication over the internet and
for the intranet communication will be through TCP/IP protocol suite.

3.3 Performance Requirements
• This subsection should specify both the static and the dynamic numerical requirements
placed on the software or on human interaction with the software as a whole. Static
numerical requirements may include the following:
a) The number of terminals to be supported;
b) The number of simultaneous users to be supported;
c) Amount and type of information to be handled.
• Dynamic numerical requirements may include, for example, the numbers of transactions
and tasks and the amount of data to be processed within certain time periods for both
normal and peak workload conditions.
• 3.4 Design Constraints
• The system shall be built using a standard web page development tool that conforms to
either IBM’s CUA standards or Microsoft’s GUI standards.
• Standards compliance
This subsection should specify the requirements derived from existing standards or
regulations. They may include the following:
a) Report format;
b) Data naming;
c) Accounting procedures;
d) Audit tracing.

•
•

3.5 Attributes

There are a number of attributes of software that can serve as requirements
Reliability
This should specify the factors required to establish the required reliability of the software
system at time of delivery.
• Availability
This should specify the factors required to guarantee a defined availability level for the
entire system such as checkpoint, recovery, and restart.
• Security
This should specify the factors that protect the software from accidental or malicious access,
use, modification, destruction, or disclosure. Specific requirements in this area could
include the need to
a) Utilize certain cryptographical techniques;
b) Keep specific log or history data sets;
d) Restrict communications between some areas of the program;
e) Check data integrity for critical variables.
• Maintainability
This should specify attributes of software that relate to the ease of maintenance of the
software itself

3.6 Logical database requirements
• This should specify the logical requirements for any
information that is to be placed into a database. This may
include the following:
a) Types of information used by various functions;
b) Frequency of use;
c) Accessing capabilities;
d) Data entities and their relationships;
e) Integrity constraints;
f) Data retention requirements.

Systems Requirements Specification
IV Non Functional Requirements
Non functional requirements are properties that the system
must have such as performance, reusability, usability, user
friendliness, etc.
The same format as the functional requirements is to be
used for the non-functional requirements. You may provide
a brief design rationale for any requirement which you feel
requires explanation for how and/or why the requirement
was derived.

Systems Requirements Specification
V System Architecture
This section presents a high-level overview of the
anticipated system architecture using a class
diagram. It shows the fundamental objects/classes
that must be modeled with the system to satisfy its
requirements. Each class on the diagram must
include the attributes related to the class. All the
relationships between classes and their multiplicity
must be shown on the class diagram. The classes
specified in this document only are those directly
derived from the application domain.

Systems Requirements Specification
VI System Models
This section presents the use case diagram for the
system under development. The use case diagram
should be a complete version containing all the use
cases needed to describe the functionality to be
developed.

Systems Requirements Specification
VII Appendixes
Appendix A. Data dictionary
Appendix B. Raw use case point analysis
Appendix C. Screens and reports with navigation matrix.
Appendix D. Scenario analysis tables
Appendix E. Screens/reports list
Appendix F and following. Other items needed

