Software Design

Unit 3: Software Design (4 Hours)
• Introduction to Software Design,
• High-level design
• Low-level design
• Software design principles
• Design Concepts
• Characteristics of a good design
• Architectural Design
• User Interface Design: The Golden Rules
• Introduction to design patterns

What is Software Design
• Software design is process of transforming user
requirements (from the SRS document) into a
detailed, structured blueprint before coding
begins.
• It shifts focus from "what" the system does to
"how" it will function.
• It covers the broader picture, including
hardware,
software,
and
network
components.
• It deals with the overall architecture and
how various parts of the system interact.

Design Process Analysis Model -> Design Model

Software Engineering

4

Design Process Analysis Model -> Design Model
• The architectural design defines the relationship
between more structural elements of the software.
• The architectural design can be derived from the
System Specs, the analysis model, and interaction of
subsystems defined within the analysis model.
• The interface design describes how the software
communicates with systems that interpolate with it,
and with humans who use it. An interface implies a
flow of information (data, and or control) and a specific
type of behavior.
The component-level design transforms structural
elements of the software architecture into a
procedural description of software components.

Software Design Steps
• Requirement Analysis: Understand and document
the system requirements.
• Architectural
Design:
Design
the
system’s
structure, including modules and how they interact.
• Database Design: Craft the schema, tables,
relationships, and constraints for the database.
• User Interface Design: Define how users interact
with the system through its interface.
• Component Level Design: Specify the functionality
of each module in detail, including algorithms and
data structures.

Why Software Design
• Software design translates user requirements into
a technical blueprint, ensuring the system is
reliable, scalable, and maintainable before
coding begins. It:
• Reduces Cost and Risks: Identifying design
flaws early is significantly cheaper than fixing
errors during testing or maintenance.
• Enhances Maintainability and Flexibility: A welldesigned system is modular and flexible, making it
easier to adapt to changing requirements or add
new features without breaking existing code.

Why Software Design
• Enables Team Coordination: It provides a
blueprint that clarifies how to manage complex
projects, ensuring team members understand the
system structure and interdependencies.
• Ensures
Quality
Attributes: Proper
design
ensures non-functional requirements are met,
including performance, security, reliability, and
reusability.
• Ensures Technical Soundness: It prevents "design
drift" or "corrosion" where code becomes chaotic
and unmanageable over time.

High level Design
• High-level design or HLD is an initial step in the
development of applications where the overall
structure of a system is planned.
• Focuses mainly on how different components of the
system work together without getting to know
about internal coding and implementation.
• Crucial for developers, architects, and product
managers because it allows them to make sure
that all stakeholders are aligned with the project
objectives.

Components of High-Level Design
• System Architecture: System architecture is an overview of the
entire system that represents the structure and the relationships
between various components. It helps to visually represent how
different parts interact and function.
• Modules and Components: High-level design breaks down the
systems into modules or components, each with specific roles and
responsibilities, and has a distinct function that contributes to the
entire system, helping in developing an efficient system.
• Data Flow Diagrams (DFDs): Data Flow Diagrams demonstrate
the data movement within the system. They help to understand
how information is processed and pass from one end to another.

Components of High-Level Design
• Interface Design: It includes the design of application
programming interfaces (APIs) for system integration and
user interfaces (UIs) for user interaction, ensuring seamless
functionality and communication between components.
• Technology Stack: The technology stack is various
technologies and tools that will be used in the development
of the system. This includes programming languages,
frameworks, and databases.
• Deployment Architecture: It includes how the system will
be hosted and accessed. It includes server configurations,
cloud infrastructure, and network considerations.

Low Level Design
• Low-Level Design (LLD) plays a crucial role in
software development, transforming highlevel abstract concepts into detailed,
actionable components that developers can
use to build the system.
• LLD is the blueprint that guides developers
on how to implement specific components
of a system, such as classes, methods,
algorithms, and data structures.

Low Level Design
• Create a LLD from given HLD
• For HLD to LLD conversion, we generally use Unified
Modelling Language (UML) diagrams. Adding to these
diagrams we use OOP principles and SOLID principles and
design patterns while designing.

Low Level Design
• Create a LLD from given HLD
• For HLD to LLD conversion, we generally use Unified Modelling
Language (UML) diagrams. Adding to these diagrams we use OOP
principles and SOLID principles and design patterns while
designing.
• Step 1. Understanding Object-Oriented Principles
• The user requirement is processed by using concepts of OOPS
programming. OOP concepts serve as the foundation for LLD, and
having a deep understanding of them will help you design
maintainable and scalable software components. Encapsulation,
Polymorphism, Abstraction.

Low Level Design
• Step 2. Analyzing and Designing Components
• LLD requires you to analyze real-world problems and
break them down into object-world problems using OOP
concepts. This is a critical step where real-world entities are
modelled into objects and classes.
• You should focus on:
• Identifying classes and objects based on the system
requirements.
• Determining relationships (like associations, inheritance,
etc.) between different entities.
• Using SOLID principles to ensure your design is clean,
maintainable, and scalable.

Low Level Design
• Step 3. Implementing Design Patterns
• Now the implementation of our above object oriented
problem is carried out with the help of design patterns.
Design patterns are reusable solutions to common problems
encountered in software design.
•

•

•

Creational Patterns (e.g., Singleton, Factory): These patterns deal
with object creation mechanisms, trying to create objects in a way
that is appropriate to the situation.
Behavioral Patterns (e.g., Observer, Strategy): Focus on
communication between objects and how they interact with each
other.
Structural Patterns (e.g., Adapter, Composite): These patterns are
concerned with simplifying the structure of the system and its
components.

Low Level Design
• Step 4. Use of UML Diagram in LLD
• UML diagrams play an important role in converting
HLD to LLD. They provide a proper and clear visual
representation of the components and their
relationships, which helps developers significantly.
Some of the most important UML diagrams used in
LLD include:
• Class Diagrams, Sequence Diagrams, Activity
Diagrams, State Diagrams, Use Case Diagrams
• These diagrams play a significant role in LLD,
providing a clear visual representation of the
components and their interactions.

Low Level Design
• 5. Implementing SOLID Principles
•

•
•
•
•
•
•

These are sets of 5 principles(rules) that are strictly followed as per
requirements of the system or requirements for optimal designing. In
order to write scalable, flexible, maintainable, and reusable code:
Single-responsibility principle (SRP)
Open-closed principle (OCP)
Liskov’s Substitution Principle(LSP)
Interface Segregation Principle (ISP)
Dependency Inversion Principle (DIP)
It's important to keep in mind that SOLID principles are just
guidelines and not strict rules to be followed. The key is to strike a
balance between following these principles and considering the
specific needs and constraints of your business requirement.

Principles of Software Design

• Should not suffer from "Tunnel Vision" - While designing
the process, it should not suffer from “tunnel vision” which
means that is should not only focus on completing or
achieving the aim but on other effects also.

Principles of Software Design

• Traceable to analysis model - The design process should be
traceable to the analysis model which means it should
satisfy all the requirements that software requires to
develop a high-quality product.
• Should not "Reinvent The Wheel" - The design process
should not reinvent the wheel that means it should not
waste time or effort in creating things that already exist.
• Minimize Intellectual distance - The design process should
reduce the gap between real-world problems and software
solutions for that problem meaning it should simply
minimize intellectual distance.
• Exhibit uniformity and integration - The design should
display uniformity which means it should be uniform
throughout the process without any change. Integration
means it should mix or combine all parts of software i.e.
subsystems into one system.

Principles of Software Design

• Accommodate change - The software should be
designed in such a way that it accommodates the
change implying that the software should adjust
to the change that is required to be done as per
the user's need.
• Degrade gently - The software should be designed
in such a way that it degrades gracefully which
means it should work properly even if an error
occurs during the execution.
• Assessed or quality - The design should be
assessed or evaluated for the quality meaning that
during the evaluation, the quality of the design
needs to be checked and focused on.

Principles of Software Design

• Review to discover errors - The design should be
reviewed which means that the overall evaluation
should be done to check if there is any error
present or if it can be minimized.
• Design is not coding and coding is not design Design means describing the logic of the
program to solve any problem and coding is a
type of language that is used for the
implementation of a design.

Fundamental Design Concepts

• abstraction—data, procedure, control
• architecture—the overall structure of the software
• patterns—”conveys the essence” of a proven design solution
• modularity—compartmentalization of data and function
• Information hiding—controlled interfaces
• Functional independence—single-minded function and low
coupling
• refinement—elaboration of detail for all abstractions
• Refactoring—a reorganization technique that simplifies the
design

Data
door
Abstraction
manufacturer
model number
type
swing direction
inserts
lights
type
number
weight
opening mechanism
implemented as a data structure
•

Abstraction (Hide Irrelevant data): Abstraction simply means to hide the
details to reduce complexity and increase efficiency or quality

Procedural
Abstraction
open
details of enter
algorithm

implemented with a "knowledge" of the
object that is associated with enter

Architectur “The overall structure of the software and the ways in
which that structure provides conceptual integrity for a
e
system.”
Structural properties. This aspect of the architectural design
representation defines the components of a system (e.g., modules,
objects, filters) and the manner in which those components are
packaged and interact with one another. For example, objects are
packaged to encapsulate both data and the processing that
manipulates the data and interact via the invocation of methods
Extra-functional properties. The architectural design description
should address how the design architecture achieves requirements for
performance, capacity, reliability, security, adaptability, and other
system characteristics.
Families of related systems. The architectural design should draw
upon repeatable patterns that are commonly encountered in the
design of families of similar systems. In essence, the design should

Patterns

Design Pattern Template
A pattern simply means a repeated form or design in which the same
shape is repeated several times to form a pattern.
Pattern name—describes the essence of the pattern in a short but
expressive name
Intent—describes the pattern and what it does
Also-known-as—lists any synonyms for the pattern
Motivation—provides an example of the problem
Applicability—notes specific design situations in which the pattern is
applicable
Structure—describes the classes that are required to implement the
pattern
Participants—describes the responsibilities of the classes that are
required to implement the pattern
Collaborations—describes how the participants collaborate to carry out
their responsibilities
Related patterns—cross-references related design patterns

Modular Design
• Modularity in design means subdividing a
system into smaller parts so that these parts
can be created independently and then use
these parts in different systems to perform
different functions.
• Each module handles one function.
• With a strong modular design, you can update
or fix one part without touching the rest.
• Testing becomes easier. Teams work in
parallel. You gain speed and stability.

Modular Design

Information Hiding
module

controlled
interface

• algorithm
• data structure
• details of external interface
• resource allocation policy

clients

"secret"

a specific design decision

Why Information Hiding?
• reduces the likelihood of “side effects”
• limits the global impact of local design
decisions
• emphasizes communication through
controlled interfaces
• discourages the use of global data
• leads to encapsulation—an attribute of
high quality design
• results in higher quality software

Functional Independence
• It is design principle where modules (functions,
classes, components) are developed to perform a
single, specific task with minimal interaction with
other modules.
• Achieved through high cohesion and low coupling,
it enhances maintainability, testability, and reusability
while reducing error propagation.
• Cohesion (High): The degree to which internal elements
of a module belong together and focus on a single,
well-defined function.
• Coupling (Low): The degree to which a module relies on
other modules to function.

Functional Independence
• Cohesion (Relationship Within a Module) :
• Cohesion measures the strength of functional
relatedness of elements within a single module or
class.
• High Cohesion (Good): A Book class that only
contains data and methods directly related to a
book's title, author, and ISBN.
• Low Cohesion (Bad): A UserAccount class that
handles user credentials, calculates shopping
cart discounts, and sends emails.

Functional Independence

• Coupling (Relationship Between Modules)
• Coupling measures the degree of interdependence
between different modules or classes.
• Low Coupling (Good): A PaymentGateway module that
receives only a PaymentDetails object from the Order
module, making it easy to swap processors.
• High Coupling (Bad): Module A directly alters the
private variables of Module B (Content Coupling),
causing changes in B to break A.

Functional Independence
• In a library system:
• High Cohesion: A BorrowingManager class only
handles borrowing/returning books.
• Low Coupling: The BorrowingManager does not
know how the InventoryManager stores books; it
only calls a method isBookAvailable(bookId).

open

Stepwise
Refinement
walk to door;
reach for knob;
open door;
walk through;
close door.

•

repeat until door opens
turn knob clockwise;
if knob doesn't turn, then
take key out;
find correct key;
insert in lock;
endif
pull/push door
move out of way;
end repeat

The refinement means elaborating a system or software. Refinement is very
necessary to find out any error if present and then to reduce it.

Refactoring

• "Refactoring is the process of changing a software system
in such a way that it does not alter the external behavior
of the code [design] yet improves its internal structure.”
• When software is refactored, the existing design is examined
for
– redundancy
– unused design elements
– inefficient or unnecessary algorithms
– poorly constructed or inappropriate data structures
– or any other design failure that can be corrected to yield a
better design.

Characteristics of a good software design
Characteristic

Description

Goal

Modularity

Break system into small parts

Manageability

Cohesion

Abstraction

One task per module
Simplicity & clarity
Low interdependence between
Flexibility
modules
Hide internal details
Simplicity, security

Reusability

Code usable in multiple places

Saves time and effort

Scalability

System can grow with time

Long-term usefulness

Maintainability

Easy to update and fix

Reduce development cost

Efficiency

Uses fewer resources

Performance

Security

Prevent unauthorized access

Data protection

Consistency

Uniform design standards

Usability & collaboration

Coupling

Design Model
• The design model has the following layered elements
– Data/class design
– Architectural design
– Interface design
Component-level Design
– Component-level design
Interface Design
Architectural Design
Data/Class Design

Design Elements
•
•
•

•
•

Data/class design
– Creates a model of data and objects that is represented at a high level of
abstraction
Architectural design
– Depicts the overall layout of the software
Interface design
– Tells how information flows into and out of the system and how it is
communicated among the components defined as part of the architecture
– Includes the user interface, external interfaces, and internal interfaces
Component-level design elements
– Describes the internal detail of each software component by way of data
structure definitions, algorithms, and interface specifications
Deployment-level design elements
– Indicates how software functionality and subsystems will be allocated
within the physical computing environment that will support the software

40

An Architectural Design
customer requirements
Method
"four bedrooms, three baths,
lots of glass ..."

architectural design

Analyzing Architectural Design

1. Collect scenarios.
2. Elicit requirements, constraints, and environment
description.
3. Describe the architectural styles/patterns that have been
chosen to address the scenarios and requirements:
• module view
• process view
• data flow view
4. Evaluate quality attributes by considered each attribute in
isolation.
5. Identify the sensitivity of quality attributes to various
architectural attributes for a specific architectural style.
6. Critique candidate architectures (developed in step 3) using
the sensitivity analysis conducted in step 5.

Why Architecture?
The architecture is not the operational software.
Rather, it is a representation that enables a software
engineer to:
(1)analyze the effectiveness of the design in meeting its
stated requirements,
(2)The architecture highlights early design decisions
that will have a profound impact on all software
engineering work that follows and, as important, on the
ultimate success of the system as an operational entity.
(3) reduce the risks associated with the construction of
the software.

Architectural Styles

• The software that is built for computer-based systems exhibit
one of many architectural styles
• Each style describes a system category that encompasses
• A set of component types that perform a function required
by the system
• A set of connectors (subroutine call, remote procedure call,
data stream, socket) that enable communication,
coordination, and cooperation among components
• Semantic constraints that define how components can be
integrated to form the system
• A topological layout of the components indicating their
runtime interrelationships
•
•
•
•
•

Data-centered architectures
Data flow architectures
Call and return architectures
Object-oriented architectures
Layered architectures

Data-Centered Style
• Has the goal of integrating the data
• Refers to systems in which the access and update of a widely
accessed data store occur
• A client runs on an independent thread of control
• The shared data may be a passive repository or an active
blackboard
– A blackboard notifies subscriber clients when changes occur
in data of interest
• At its heart is a centralized data store that communicates
with a number of clients
• Clients are relatively independent of each other so they can be
added, removed, or changed in functionality
• The data store is independent of the clients

Data-Centered Architecture

Data Flow Style
•
•
•
•

Characterized by viewing the system as a series of transformations on
successive pieces of input data
Data enters the system and then flows through the components one at a time
until they are assigned to output or a data store
Batch sequential style
– The processing steps are independent components
– Each step runs to completion before the next step begins
Pipe-and-filter style
– Emphasizes the incremental transformation of data by successive
components
– The filters incrementally transform the data (entering and exiting via
streams)
– The filters use little contextual information and retain no state between
instantiations
– The pipes are stateless and simply exist to move data between filters

Data Flow Architecture

Call-and-Return Style
•
•

•

Has been the dominant architecture since the start of software
development
Main program and subroutine style
– Decomposes a program hierarchically into small pieces (i.e., modules)
– Typically has a single thread of control that travels through various
components in the hierarchy
Remote procedure call style
– Consists of main program and subroutine style of system that is
decomposed into parts that are resident on computers connected via a
network
– Strives to increase performance by distributing the computations and
taking advantage of multiple processors
– Incurs a finite communication time between subroutine call and
response

Call and Return Architecture

Layered Architecture

Architectural Design Process
• Basic Steps
– Creation of the data design
– Derivation of one or more representations of the
architectural structure of the system
– Analysis of alternative architectural styles to choose the
one best suited to customer requirements and quality
attributes
– Elaboration of the architecture based on the selected
architectural style
•
A database designer creates the data architecture for a
system to represent the data components
• A system architect selects an appropriate architectural
style derived during system engineering and software
requirements analysis

User Interface Design
Easy to learn?
Easy to use?
Easy to understand?
Typical Design Errors
lack of consistency
too much memorization
no guidance / help
no context sensitivity
poor response
unfriendly

User Interface Design
• User interface (UI) design in software engineering is the
systematic process of creating intuitive, visual, and
interactive elements such as screens, buttons, and
icons that enable users to interact efficiently with
software.
• It focuses on maximizing usability, user experience
(UX), and responsiveness, often through iterative
development (analysis, design, construction, validation) to
reduce user errors and increase satisfaction.
• Types of User Interface
• Command Line Interface
• Graphical User Interface

User Interface Design Process
• User interface (UI) design

User Interface Design Process
• The analysis and design process of a user interface is iterative
and can be represented by a spiral model.
• The analysis and design process of user interface consists of
four framework activities.

User Interface Design Process
•
•

•

•
•
•
•
•

1. User, Task, Environmental Analysis, and Modeling
Initially, the focus is based on the profile of users who will interact
with the system, i.e., understanding, skill and knowledge, type of
user, etc., based on the user's profile users are made into categories.
Based on the requirement's developer understand how to develop
the interface. Once all the requirements are gathered a detailed
analysis is conducted.
The analysis of the user environment focuses on the physical work
environment. Among the questions to be asked are:
Where will the interface be located physically?
Will the user be sitting, standing, or performing other tasks unrelated to the
interface?
Does the interface hardware accommodate space, light, or noise constraints?
Are there special human factors considerations driven by environmental factors?

User Interface Design Process
• 2. Interface Design
• The goal of this phase is to define the set of interface
objects and actions i.e., control mechanisms that enable
the user to perform desired tasks.
• Indicate how these control mechanisms affect the system.
Specify the action sequence of tasks and subtasks.
• Always follow the three golden rules stated by Theo
Mandel. Design issues such as response time, command
and action structure, error handling, and help facilities
are considered as the design model is refined. This phase
serves as the foundation for the implementation phase.

User Interface Design Process
•
•

•
•

3. Interface Construction and Implementation
The implementation activity begins with the creation of a prototype
(model) that enables usage scenarios to be evaluated. As iterative
design process continues a User Interface toolkit that allows the
creation of windows, menus, device interaction, error messages,
commands, and many other elements of an interactive environment
can be used for completing the construction of an interface.
4. Interface Validation
This phase focuses on testing the interface. The interface should be
in such a way that it should be able to perform tasks correctly,
and it should be able to handle a variety of tasks. It should
achieve all the user's requirements. It should be easy to use and
easy to learn. Users should accept the interface as a useful one in
their work.

User Interface Design Golden Rules

• Place the user in control
• Reduce the user’s memory load
• Make the interface consistent

Place the User in Control

1. Define interaction modes in a way that does not force a
user into unnecessary or undesired actions.
2. Provide for flexible interaction.
3. Allow user interaction to be interruptible and undoable.
4. Streamline interaction as skill levels advance and allow
the interaction to be customized.
5. Hide technical internals from the casual user.
6. Design for direct interaction with objects that appear on
the screen.

Reduce the User’s Memory Load
1. Reduce demand on short-term memory.
2. Establish meaningful defaults.
3. Define shortcuts that are intuitive.
4. The visual layout of the interface should be
based on a real world metaphor.
5. Disclose information in a progressive
fashion.

Make the Interface Consistent
1. Allow the user to put the current task
into a meaningful context.
2. Maintain consistency across a family
of applications.
3. If past interactive models have
created user expectations, do not
make changes unless there is a
compelling reason to do so.

User Interface Design Models
• User model — a profile of all end users of the
system
• Design model — a design realization of the
user model
• Mental model (system perception) — the
user’s mental image of what the interface is
• Implementation model — the interface “look
and feel” coupled with supporting information
that describe interface syntax and semantics

Interface Design Patterns
• Patterns are available for
– The complete UI
– Page layout
– Forms and input
– Tables
– Direct data manipulation
– Navigation
– Searching
– Page elements

Introduction to Design patterns
• Design patterns are reusable
solutions
to
common
software design problems
that help developers build
cleaner
and
more
maintainable systems.
• They provide templates for
solving issues in object
creation,
structure,
and
behaviour. They improve code
flexibility and scalability.
• Unlike
a
library
or
framework, which can be
inserted and used right
away, a design pattern is more
of a template to approach the
problem at hand.

Creational design patterns
• These design patterns are all about class instantiation. This pattern can
be further divided into class-creation patterns and object-creational patterns.
While class-creation patterns use inheritance effectively in the instantiation
process, object-creation patterns use delegation effectively to get the job
done.
• Abstract Factory
Creates an instance of several families of classes
• Factory Method
Creates an instance of several derived classes
• Prototype
A fully initialized instance to be copied or cloned
• Singleton
A class of which only a single instance can exist

Structural design patterns
• These design patterns are all about Class and Object
composition. Structural class-creation patterns use inheritance
to compose interfaces. Structural object-patterns define ways
to compose objects to obtain new functionality.
• Adapter : Match interfaces of different classes
• Façade: A single class that represents an entire subsystem
• Proxy :An object representing another object

Behavioral design patterns
• These design patterns are all about Class's objects communication.
Behavioral patterns are those patterns that are most specifically
concerned with communication between objects.
• Command: Encapsulate a command request as an object
• Mediator: Defines simplified communication between classes
• Observer: A way of notifying change to a number of classes

